# Knowledge Graph Embedding With Graph Convolutional Network and Bidirectional Gated Recurrent Unit for Fault Diagnosis

of Industrial Processes

Jie Dong $ ^{ID} $ , Cuiping Chen $ ^{ID} $ , Chi Zhang $ ^{ID} $ , Jin Yao Ma, and Kaixiang Peng $ ^{ID} $ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—The stability and reliability of modern industrial processes are key factors in ensuring production safety and achieving high quality and efficiency. Complex industrial processes are characterized by dynamics, nonlinearity, and multivariable coupling, which present challenges for fault diagnosis. To address the limitations of traditional fault diagnosis methods in handling complex industrial processes, a fault diagnosis framework of knowledge graph embedded graph convolutional network and bidirectional gated recurrent unit (KG-GCIGCN) is proposed in this article. First, a domain knowledge graph of the industrial process is constructed in a top-down manner, leveraging the expertise of domain specialists. Next, node correlation analysis is performed using the maximum information coefficient (MIC) alongside the knowledge graph, resulting in the formation of an adjacency matrix. Then, the knowledge graph is embedded within the graph convolutional network (GCN), and a bidirectional gated recurrent unit (BiGRU) is introduced to capture the dynamic correlations present in time-series data, thereby enhancing the performance of the fault diagnosis model. Finally, fault diagnosis is achieved based on the predicted residuals. By integrating the deep information from the knowledge graph, the framework facilitates inference of the root cause of faults and identifies the propagation paths of the faults. The effectiveness of the proposed method is validated using actual data from the hot strip mill process (H SMP), achieving a fault detection accuracy of 99.23%.

Index Terms— Bidirectional gated recurrent unit (BiGRU), fault diagnosis, graph convolutional network (GCN), hot strip mill process (H SMP), knowledge graph.

### I. INTRODUCTION

THE stability and reliability of industrial processes are pivotal to the success of modern manufacturing [1]. With advancements in technology and the increasing complexity of manufacturing processes, fault diagnosis in industrial production has become a key component for ensuring production efficiency and product quality. Faults occurring within industrial processes can lead not only to production downtime and resource wastage, but also to adverse effects on safety and the environment. Consequently, fault diagnosis has garnered significant attention as a prominent research area. Among various fault diagnosis methods, model-based methods are highly interpretable. However, constructing the models may be challenging due to the often complex process mechanisms involved.

With the continuous progress of computer networks, data storage technology has rapidly developed. A large amount of data generated in complex industrial production processes are stored, attracting increasing attention from researchers and practitioners interested in the potential high-value information within these data. Consequently, data-driven methods that do not rely on a priori knowledge have become increasingly popular. These include partial least squares (PLSs) [2], [3], and canonical correlation analysis (CCA) [4]. The common

Received 29 November 2024; revised 5 January 2025; accepted 5 January 2025. Date of publication 17 January 2025; date of current version 28 February 2025. This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant 62273031, Grant U21A20483, and Grant 62373040. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was Dr. Ke Feng. (Corresponding author: Kaixiang Peng.) The authors are with the Key Laboratory of Knowledge Automation for Industrial Processes of Ministry of Education, School of Automation and Electrical Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China (e-mail: kaixiang@ustb.edu.cn). Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSEN.2025.3528223